Hey everyone and welcome back.
In this letter we're going to be talking about floating layers and there's even in the guimpe manual
itself.
It's one of the top causes for people getting stuck in guimpe.
It's happened to me several times a busy working on your project only to find that it looks like gimp
has become unresponsive.
I'll make sure this link is available in the lecture resources for you so you can have a good read of
it.
If you need to but for the time being let's hop over into guimpe and start looking at these floating
selections.
Okay so we're back over in GIMP and the first thing that I want to do here of course is to have something
to select to demonstrate this.
I'm going to go to file new and create a new file that's 32 by 32.
And as always zoom in now floating selections can occur manually and they can curl automatically depending
on the tools that you're using and one of the big questions of course is why would he use a floating
selection.
Well a floating selection is like a temporary layer not show you that in action in a few moments.
Now often you just create a new layer and work on that.
However there may be times where you need to take the lay you're currently working on take a selection
of it and float it.
See you're not working on any of the other bits that you've got selected.
Now I'll demonstrate this.
Now I'm going to go ahead and select the red rectangular Select Tool and literally create a rectangle
selection that's in front of us.
Normally when you go ahead and let's say use a brush tool we will see that you're actually still colouring
in the background layer at the moment.
But it's constrained to where that selection is.
If I go ahead and undo that and float that selection I can then operate on it independently of that
background layer.
So if we had a background that already had a colour on it I'm sure to dismiss everything for a moment.
Sure I've got the right tool before I dismiss.
Okay so I've gone through and using the gradient tool I've decided to make a lovely pattern like so
and then I go ahead and select parts of it because I want to edit this area here.
Now if I go to select and go to float it will extract facts from the rest of the image and we can see
here the background now has a hole in it.
If we have a look at the layers tab and there is also above it a floating selection.
So if you ever find GIMP has become unresponsive.
Take a look over in the layers tab and see if you've got a floating selection.
There are a couple of tools as I've mentioned that will automatically create a floating selection.
We've manually done it here.
Now once you've done that let's say we go ahead and put the gradient going the other way just to see
what happens.
We can see here that it's taken that selection it's lifted it up.
We've altered that selection.
Done something to it will happen ever it happens to be.
Now we can put that back down on the background layer.
Or we could put it on its own individual layer.
First of all.
Demonstrate the background layer and then Arlon do so we can experience the other ones in quick succession.
So what we need to do in order to put the floating selection back down onto the background layer is
anchor it and you can anchor it in several ways.
We can go to the layout menu and you can see anchor layer.
You also have the shortcut key there control in age.
Now if you want to do that directly from the layers tab itself along the bottom of it there is something
that I thought looked like a flower.
Initially it is in fact an anchor.
And if you go ahead and click that or use one of the other methods its merges the floating selection
back down to the background layer.
So that's one way of anchoring that back down.
Another way would be if I just undo what I've done.
Goes back to that floating selection.
I can go ahead and straightaway click a new layer.
Now I go ahead and click on that we will see the floating selection has now been pasted on to a layer
called floated layer and of course you could name it appropriately.
Now one thing to bear in mind when you do this is that the floated layer is the size of the selection
and we can see the layer boundary is a round.
They have not got a layer boundary.
You might have turned it off under view and show layer boundary lines enabled at the moment which does
mean that it can again be further confusion.
If you go ahead and start colouring something in like I've done here and you can't colorin outside of
that image if that if you did do that you'd have to either expand the layer or create a new layer first.
That was the appropriate size.
Now there are some actions which will cause a floating layer immediately without necessarily realizing
that's what's going on.
One of them is if you're copying cutting or and pasting basically any copy cut and paste.
If I go ahead new that.
Now let's use the Select Tool at select part of this layer.
Now bear in mind that only the area in the layer boundary is actually going to be selected.
We go ahead and go edit and let's cut that that's actually remove it.
Again that's cut away and if I just paste it's going edit pace and of course if you see a keyboard shortcuts
you could go control x and then control V.
And we've got ourselves another floating selection.
If we go ahead and try and move that around of course we can move round the floating selection that
we've made.
But as you can see I cannot move it on top of the other layers just yet.
Now I go ahead and click new layer it then appears so can be a little confusing at first because you
can always see what's going on when you've initially floated automatically floated a selection.
If you're doing a copy and paste as you saw there it looked like it just disappeared behind the other
floated layer and in fact it had an it was still there.
We just couldn't really see what was going on only an outline so it can be a bit confusing if you're
not used to that.
Now if I just undo one step there we still now have a floating selection that I can move about.
If I were to click elsewhere because I've got it selected the actual move tool selected on pick a layer
or guide files to go ahead and click on the background layer and try and start moving that you can see
that it's immediately flattened my floating selection.
Back to the layer that was beneath it and now of course I can start to try and move the back around.
Now you've got to watch out for that because obviously I've just lost half of my previous selection
that I was moving about and I'm going to undo to bring that back and were back there.
Now it is important to realize that whilst you've got a floating selection you cannot do anything on
any other layer.
You have to anchor it or attach it to a new layer essentially anchoring it to a new layer before you
can carry on doing anything else.
And that cat that's caught me out several times and I'm sure it will catch you out at some point as
well.
And that covers floating selections down to a tee.
You will get tripped up by them at some point.
It's happened to me it's happened to all of us.
So don't worry when you do it will happen but at least now you know that all you need is glance over
at the layers tab see if you've got a floating selection.
Decide what to do with it Joan just go anchor because if I was to place it here for instance and just
click anchor I might lose information.
Decide what you're going to do with it and then anchor it down before you can continue working on the
rest of your project.
I hope you found the helpful and I will see you guys in the next lecture.